Teksting av Nicolai Winther
今東京都庭園美術館でアメリカに生きた日系人画家たち
希望と苦悩の反省期という展覧会が開かれています
This exhibition was planned to commemorate
the end of the war. The works of the
artists who played an active part in the
United States, Kuniyoshi Yasuo, Henry
Sugimoto, and Usui Bunpei, are exhibited.
中でも一際目を引くのが、
共生収容所の中で描かれた日系人画家たちの作品です。
彼らは収容所の中で屈辱に耐えながら、
絵画によって希望を見出そうと絵筆を取りました。
日本人修行所
でも50年間くらいから50年間くらいにあんなにたくさんの方が向こうに渡って絵を描いていたという事実は僕もある意味では初めてで非常にびっくりしたんですよね。
尾端千代という名前はご存知でした?
全然知らなかったんですよ。やっぱり非常に印象的で素晴らしい絵を描いていらっしゃるので、なんで今まで知らなかったんだろうと思って非常に自分の不勉強を恥じたという。
Obata Chiura was the first person I met,
and he had been drawing pictures to
protect the culture and humanity of the
people in the camp. His leader was Obata
Chiura. Obata Chiura had a great influence
on the art movement of the West Coast of
America, and he visited the West Coast of
America.
The West Coast of America, San Francisco
古くから日系移民の多かったこの町が、尾端千浦とその仲間たちの活動の舞台となりました。
ノンフィクションライターの下島哲郎さんは、10年以上にわたって収容所の日系人画家たちを取材してきました。
何度もここへ通って関係者の話を聞くうちに、収容所の生活に意外な側面があったことを発見したと下島さんは言います。
I was surprised to see that the life in
the camp was very fulfilling for the
painting.
Many people say that they enjoyed it.
The life in the camp was fulfilling? Yes.
I was surprised and surprised to find that
I met a painter called Chihura Obata about
three years ago.
日本画家小畑千浦は1903年明治36年にアメリカに渡りました。 Sumieya
Suisai ga de Nishikaigan no Bijitsukai no
chumoku wo atsume Nochi ni California
Daigaku Barclay ko no kyojo ni battegi sa
remashita
Obata Chiura ga nakunaru made sundeita
Barclay no iya wo tazuremashita
Hello! Konnichiwa! Nice to see you again!
Obata-san, Ojo-san, Yuri-san Yoroshiku
onegaishimasu, Sakurai-desu Nice to meet
you Sakurai-desu, Yoroshiku onegaishimasu
Please come in Ega demo arimasu? Ai Aremo
sou desu ka? So, papa ga kakimashita
Magnolia, Blue Jay, Mokure no Hana. I
really liked drawing birds. I drew a bird.
There was no studio. She was always
surrounded by her family and drawing in
the dining room.
So this is the place where you used to sit
instead of the studio? Yes. Hei, doko ni
suwatte kaite irashita nesuka? Kocchi ni
suwatte, window ga minna akete, totemo
suki datta koko de yaruno.
Donna fuu ni shite kaite irashita nesho
ne? Omoite irashimasu ka? So, papa wa
baseball totemo suki datta. Yakkyu ga. So,
dakara radio koko mimi ni irete, kou yate
kaite.
Owa Tachiura was born in 1885, in the year
of 18th year, in Okaima prefecture.
本名佐藤造六。
五歳の時に仙台に住む兄、六一の養子になりました。
千浦、七歳の時の絵です。
もともと絵の得意だった千浦は、日本画家だった六一の影響を受け、
自らも画家になることを決意します。
Chura, who was taught by Rokuichi, was
only 17 years old when he won the Japanese
Art Museum's Grand Prize, and he was
awarded the first-ever award. However, the
following year, he suddenly crossed over
to the United States.
The world is vast, and there are hundreds
of millions of people.
人たちがいます。されど、私の真に頼むべき、真に語るべき、真に楽しむべきは皆様だけです。
この離れがたき皆様のもとを去り、遠く異郷に来て、真苦患難ものともせず、成功を希望するのです。
決して大きな贅沢なる家で、美しい着物を着、美味しいものを食べたいというわけではありません。
必ずや天下に尾端千浦の書であると言わせる策を成して帰ります。
アメリカに渡った千浦はスクールボーイをしたり、日経新聞のイラストを描いて生活を始めます。
渡米して9年目、27歳の時に描いた千浦書記の代表作です。
大地に立つおゆうしい少女は、結婚して間もない新妻、春子です。
薄草とした杉木立ち。
太い幹や枝の一本一本が墨の濃淡によって巧みにかき分けられています。
Asimoto ni wa daichi kara seimei wo uketa
chiisana kusa ga gunsei shi, hana wo
musunde imasu
Haruko's expectation and anxiety, which
had already taken over her new life, are
symbolically depicted in the transparent
air at dawn.
Chihura, who opened the new territory of
Japanese painting in the United States,
was inspired by his creative will to
create new themes for his works. He
traveled to many places to find new
themes. He left a lot of his works in the
basement warehouse.
Where did you draw this painting? Yes,
this is a painting that was done in
Yosemite Valley in 1938, right before the
war. You're drawing Yosemite? Right.
Grandpa used to go to the valley every
summer for camping. Oh, every summer. And
sketching and painting and of course
fishing. Of course. That's pre-war, isn't
it?
A storm that strikes the warning of
Yosemite National Park.
It depicts the dynamic change of the vast
nature.
1927年尾端千浦はカリフォルニア大学バークレー校の美術教授ワースライダーと共に寄せ見てを訪れました。そして2ヶ月にわたってキャンプ生活をしながら寄せ見ての大自然を描きました。
At that time, Yosemite was the
representative national treasure of the
United States, and was written by many
painters.
However, Yosemite, written by Japanese
painter Obata Chiura, made the Americans
feel the appearance of Yosemite that had
never been seen before.
Chura's Yosemite series has further
enhanced his reputation.
Monterey, very beautiful area. Grandpa
enjoyed painting the ocean and the scenery
there. Monterey's coast? Yes, from
Monterey to the south. Matsu is in the
middle, it's very Japanese. Yes, Chihura
grew up in Sendai from the age of 5. I
think there is a view of Matsushima Bay in
the corner of his head. I think the
scenery remains, but the name Shura was
also taken from Matsushima Bay.
So you're looking for such a scenery. I
always have it in my head, and I think I
wandered through California in the United
States. I think I was lost.
The famous school in the United States,
the University of California, Berkeley.
Chura, who returned from Yosemite, was
invited as a Japanese artist of this
university.
雨をかきたいならば雨に打たれよ。
風をかきたいならば風に吹かれよ。
そして何千もの心のレンズを通して書きなさい。
中羅の講義は学生たちの絶大なる支持を受けました。
Ova Tachiura Ova Tachiura har restat utsat
på campuset i Bakre. Denne tog er en av de
fleste. Det heter Seizertower.
Det er en fantastisk tog. Det er helt
sammen med den blå skyldet. Det er helt
sammen med den blå skyldet.
Hidmo aan kongrulo mette kan ohne xoz
olagkai?
Colin Ogates際 Have veni Femke meg mendre
Oga band aw平 berita regi tando nor
tokababura
shidyou Yes, the blue sky in California is
a unique color of Chula, called Chula
Blue.
The lake on the mountain is painted with
rock paint.
山上の湖
Teksting av Nicolai
Winther
線と色彩で躍動的な女性たちを描き出しています。
1930年代、アメリカでは新しい美術の動きが出ていました。
この作品にも当時のアメリカ中小表現主義の影響が伺えます。
Obata Chiura California's landscape. And
certainly he has a poetic eye that holds
the most poetic moments of the place.
The time before the Pacific War
日系人たちの不安が表現されています。
1942年2月ルーズベルト大統領令によって西海岸の日系人およそ12万人が適正外国人として強制収容されることになりました尾端チューラも家族とともにサンフランシスコの南